---
title: "Please Read Ann Leckie"
---

This post is going to get a bit strident so I'll share a warning up front that while I recommend this in the strongest possible language, if you don't like fiction, or science fiction, or reading, or don't have time to read, I still totes love and respect you, even if I'm probably not going to fully understand you.

Okay!

Please go read **Ancillary Justice** if you haven't. I'm going to be writing an essay here explaining why I think it's the best science fiction I've read in years, and how it evolves on some true classics of the genre. But it also won all the awards when it came out. If my plea and this cache of awards has convinced you, maybe don't read this, and go read the book instead?

Also, this essay is super excited by _themes_ and ideas, and don't let that focus convince you that this book is dull. It's an action-packed page turner, it just also happens to be razor sharp.

Okay, let's break down this book to talk about why it is So Good. To do this I want to talk about how it tackles two central themes of artificial intelligence, and empire Then I want to look at how gender and race (and culture) are presented in the novel, and how this changes the experience of reading it.

The thesis statement is thus: "Leckie's science fiction presents a modern take on the genre that is radically transformative from the classics, and makes you think not just about itself, but about other stories you have read".

We ready? Great, let's go.

## So, Artificial Intelligence

Writing AI is hard. The biggest problem I generally have with writing AI is that they have to be characters within the story. If they are going to be characters, then people must be able to relate to them. So you need to add anthropomorphic qualities to them, and suddenly they are smart people who run spaceships or control robots or answer queries. I want my AI to be properly alien in how they think and act, which looks impossible when you need them to be characters. One callout here is Iain M Banks whose AI are designed to be alien, but their perspectives end up feeling too human. Their reactions feel entirely human to me.

Leckie's AIs do have human traits, but there are more reasons for it. First is the view of emotion. The AIs are encouraged to have emotion so that they can more easily make snap decisions without endless number-grinding, and, to me, this is what a philosophical definition of emotion looks like. Emotion is a thing that motivates action, which facts alone won't ever facilitate.

The other important part is that Leckie's AI use human bodies, which means there's a bunch of human things they do, that descriptions of their actions include, which helps relate, allowing Leckie to make them less human in their emotions and responses. And this is the finest trick in presenting her AI.

An 'Ancillary' in this world is a human body being controlled by a space ship. A single ship will control dozens of ancillaries at once. Our protagonist telling a first person account of events is a space ship. Meaning we get an AI narrating an event with sentences one after another of different bodies but one character doing things in different places, with each body being stiff and inhuman, but by being a human body it is easy to project on to.

This is utterly brilliant in making the AI feel not human in a much smarter way than trying to make them 'pure logic', or very smart fast-thinking people. It makes them feel proper alien.

## Empire

This is a major theme in the book, and I think it's great because Leckie Gets It, and then wants to sit down with you, and think about it, and have a conversation all about empire.

So, Empire is about expansion. An Empire has a core that gives the entire Empire its name, and then it proceeds to grow, annexing territory and 'bringing it into the empire'.  When I look at the Empire's of Rome and England, this is kind of a big deal.

Which brings questions. Once you have brought something into the Empire, how does it adapt? You can't leave troops there forever so you have to find ways to make it belong in the Empire. Once something belongs in the Empire you're also responsible for it.

At the same time, invading other places is incredibly profitable if you're fine to loot freely, so there's pressure to keep expanding, to stretch the borders, to bring more into the empire.

And if you're building an empire, you probably need to see the expansion as Good. You're 'bringing civilization', or opportunities or whatever. The murder and theft are just a regrettable consequence of good action. From the empire's view.

**deep breath**

The Radchaai empire that Leckie presents, wants to explore is guilty of all these things, and there's no interest in glorifying it. The empire does bad things regularly for its own motives. This is never glamourised. The name of the empire 'Radchaai' is also literally the word for 'civilized' within their own language. We see how cultures get co-opted into the Radch, their local religions becoming absorbed and associated with Radch faith.

The introduction sets us up perfectly to be properly critical of empire. We start outside the Radchaai, outside civilization, and everyone we meet from outside the Radch sees them as villains. We are introduced to them as villains, and only after that shown them as people.

And I wanted to highlight this as well as a lot of 'Empires' in fiction don't have this. I'm totes calling out Star Wars here for having an Empire that doesn't really deal with themes of Empire in any way. It's just a cool word to label the baddies.

I'm not going to share conclusions about Leckie's take on empire, but reading the book should provoke thinking about empires that have existed, and their legacies.

## Gender and Race (and Culture)

The way Leckie presents both gender and race are superficial shocks that the novel brings. Not superficial in the importance of the topics but superficial because neither is the focus of the story. Leckie's presentation exists to provoke and create commentary because (I assume) she sees it is important.

We are introduced to this entire science ficiton universe through our main character being confused about gender. Slowly a picture unfolds as our protagonist struggles, that the Radch don't have a concept of different genders. People are people, and their language only has one pronoun.

Then comes the mind-bendy delight: for writing Radch speech, Leckie always uses the pronoun 'she'.

This to me read as a direct contrast to _Left Hand of Darkness_ by Le Guin, who introduces us to a society who have no fixed sex, where to indicate this most characters are referred to as 'he'. We having fun with pronouns yet?

This aspect of the book is powerful because it is different from how our own society functions, and yet so well presented that if encourages us to reflect on how these concepts affect our society and this should be sparking a bunch of thinking around trans rights, nonbinary identification, and gender theory. Nicely, it is presented with a thoroughly modern sentiment.

### And Race (and Culture)

Both of these continue the theme from gender, but without something so striking to point excitedly to as the use of female pronouns everywhere. For the most part, we are left to imagine the characters as we want, but Leckie queues us through the names and the occasional description to understand that these the Radchaai are predominantly dark-skinned, and that their values for beauty are very much not modern western culture.

Culture again draws attention to some aspects that change how you imagine the society. The society is thoroughly polytheist, and very colourful, and with an obsession about tea-as-ceremony.

Which is all to say, while the Radchaai are an empire, they are not a western empire.

This is exciting (to me) because space can be so white, and so male, when you read a bunch of science fiction. This rarely gets challenged because it's 'the way things are', a default. Leckie has here wrote outside the default, boldly and deliberately, and we get a richer imagined world because of it.

## In Conclusion

Leckie creates a beautiful, fully realised world that causes us to reflect on our world as-is. This is science fiction for the current decade, grappling with social concerns we face, and letting the constructed world lead us to think through a bunch of ideas. Her writing encourages you to think, and you should definitely read it to discover how she does all this, and all the cool ideas I haven't even touched on.

I mean, I haven't even discussed the **main** theme of the novel.
